This thesis examines relationships between subjective perception and dance movements. Those primary relationships, in turn, imply a wide range of interdisciplinary secondary relationships, relating to embodiment, memory, performance, subjectivity, various modes of representation, mediation, observation, theory and choreographic practices. The perception in question refers to a phenomenologically induced approach, mainly stemming from Ernst Cassirer (1953), Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1962), and Gaston Bachelard (1994; 2000). My application of phenomenological theory is further characterised by a particular reading of the three concepts performativity, virtuality, and abstraction. The dance movements in my study are mainly exemplified by drawing on two short extracts from Merce Cunningham’s work BIPED (1999), represented as subjective experiences of live performances, video recordings, textual representations, and memories. Additionally, I consider a textual study on choreographic practices by Susan Foster (1998), and elements from William Forsythe’s (2009) collection of choreographic tools for movement generation.
My definition of performativity is based on the tradition of ordinary language philosophy by John L. Austin (1975), who first introduced the idea of the performative in 1955, and the subsequent critique of his concept of performativity by Jacques Derrida (1982). However, the more specific performative characteristics of my discussion are more closely affiliated to the field of gender studies, particularly Judith Butler’s (1990) reading of Derrida’s performativity, and Susan Foster’s (1998) critique of Butler as being too much concerned with verbal practices, as opposed to embodied, non-verbal practices.
The virtual is a concept which has a great variety of meanings and applications. The principal, but not exclusive, way in which I will refer to the virtual is strongly linked to the philosophical tradition of Gilles Deleuze (1994), who in turn derived his ideas on the virtual from a reading of Henry Bergson (1908). The scholar Paul Harris (2005) highlights how Deleuze’s notion of virtuality is distinct from the more colloquial understanding of the virtual as computer generated simulations, and applies Deleuze’s concept of virtuality to architectural spaces as a folding, or turning inside out, of the actual realm. While I will refer to computer related “virtual” practices, most notably in the form of the motion capture technology used by Cunningham in his work BIPED, it is important to notice that this more mundane denotation of the terms “virtual” and “virtuality” is not the main consideration of my discussion.
