Superficially, the concept of the abstract could be understood as analogous to the idea of a representation, in the sense of being an abstract signifier of something. A more comprehensive understanding of my use of the term will appear from Chapter Three, where I develop and combine the phenomenological and performative ideas into a synthetic and enlarged mode of subjectivity, which in Chapter Four is introduced as the “meta-subject”. Through the subjective experiences of the meta-subject, in relation to Cunningham’s BIPED, the last three chapters demonstrate how the concept of the abstract may attain additional performative and phenomenological meaning as an alternative to Bergson’s (1908) durational experience of time.
The use of BIPED as a case study is not critical to the development of my thesis. All the key concepts, such as “phenomenal performativity” in Chapter Three, the “meta-subject” in Chapter Four, the various synthetic contemplations in Chapter Five, as well as my proposal for a third complementary rule of Bergsonian intuition and the “virtual performative” in Chapter Six, could be derived from any dance performance, as long as it contains representations which allow for denotations related to subjective embodied being. In fact, the entire content of the thesis could be exemplified without referencing any dance performance at all, since the same concepts are indeed identifiable even in a basic textual signifier with denotative embodied value, such as the word “arm” or “leg”. However, such a reading would only be valid on the condition that my use of the term virtual is comprehensively understood, and since I do not arrive at an in-depth definition of the virtual until the sixth chapter, I have included BIPED in my thesis for the sake of clarity. BIPED serves as a focal point that orientates the discussion specifically towards the perception of embodied dance practice, as opposed to, for instance, a linguistic study or a discussion on embodied practices in general, hence its usefulness to the thesis.
This is not to say that my choice of two extracts from BIPED as case studies is arbitrary. On the contrary, they are carefully chosen for three main reasons: the first has to do with the ways in which the two extracts illustrate and emphasise particular aspects of perception; the second reason concerns the contextualisation of the thesis; and the third is related to Cunningham’s position and choreographic agenda in relation to the development of modern dance during the twentieth century, especially in relation to the tradition of vitalism.
