The first extract, which is represented on the attached DVD as Clip 1, emphasises the durational and synthetic aspects of perception, which I mainly discuss in Chapter Five. The extract is unique in the sense that it contains a movement sequence which could be seen as one sustained movement, lasting for approximately fourteen seconds, yet the same movement could be analysed as consisting of movement sequences of a much shorter duration. While any movement could be analytically divided into smaller parts, or sequences, anatomically and/or temporally, and hence, any movement could illustrate the same ideas as I derive from my observation of Clip 1, this particular sequence provides me with an unusually dynamic example of how this could be done, due to the dramatic durational difference between the movement sequence as a whole and its apparent parts.
The second extract, represented as Clip 2 on the attached DVD, illustrates another aspect of durational representations. In this case, I particularly pay attention to the relative differences and similarities between the computer animated and motion captured humanoids in relation to a human embodied dancer, as well as the temporal and spatial distribution of my perception. Moreover, the mixture of representations in my perception, projections of decoded strings of data and a material body in motion, gives a clear example of how one perception is a synthetic multiplicity with a multitude of fragmented origins, distributed not only in space and time, but also in abstract processes of encoding and decoding. However, as I will demonstrate in the final two chapters, both extracts from BIPED, as well as any representation of embodiment, whether this is in the form of a dance movement or a textual signifier, operate according to the same principle of fundamental difference: the actual perception of representations that appears to be different or similar is founded in a totalising virtuality, structured by degrees of difference. The choice of case studies affects the particular way in which my thesis actualises on the level of representation, but it does not change the fundamental phenomenological and virtual structures which support and lend meaning to that representation.
The context of the thesis is the second reason why I chose Cunningham’s BIPED as the main source for my case studies. Apart from being situated in, or rather, in between, the core fields of my discussion - which, as I have defined above, includes phenomenology, gender studies, the traditions of linguistics and ordinary language philosophy related to performativity, as well as the vitalist tradition of dance practices and dance writing - the original formulation of my research project was strongly influenced by choreographic explorations of body/technology interaction.
