On the other hand, while “passively” watching a theatrical dance performance, sitting in an auditorium, I could get the subjective experience of actively becoming part of the work. Based on those first-hand experiences, I concluded that the theory accompanying contemporary dance performances, especially the kind of practice that claims to generate audience interaction, had to be developed in order to accommodate for the agental role of the perceiving subject. Hence, while my research question remained unchanged, my method shifted from choreographic practice to a phenomenologically related inquiry of how a subject performatively constitutes its subjectivity in relation to artistic representations of the virtual and the abstract.
Generally speaking, the discursive aim of performance related interactive body/technology practices could often be described as a questioning, development, and/or redefinition of traditional or conventional boundaries. The particular boundary in question varies from case to case. Stelarc (2008), for instance, focuses on the concept of the cyborg, which emphasises human/machine relationships. The work Ping Body (1996) consists of Stelarc connecting his body to the Internet via a muscle stimulation interface. Audience members can view and actuate involuntary movements in the interfaced body, but only indirectly. The signals that activate Stelarc’s movements are generated by means of “random pinging (or measuring the echo times) to Internet domains” (ibid.). Hence, Ping Body exemplifies a questioning of control between the human and the machine, where the collective activity of the Internet determines the movements of a body, as opposed to the normal situation where collective bodies determine the operations of the Internet.
In contrast to Stelarc, Rubidge’s (2002) theoretical discourse emphasises the notion of performativity, referring to issues related to author/viewer/performer distinctions. The installation Sensuous Geographies (2003) - a collaboration between Rubidge, the composer Alistair MacDonald, the costume designer Maggie Moffatt, and the installation artists Maria Verdicchio and Sebastien Besse - is defined as as having performative characteristics in the sense that the audience is invited both to generate and become an integral part of the installation environment as they engage with it (Rubidge, 2003). Wechsler (1997a) shares Rubidge’s interest in setting up environments that stimulate audience/performer interaction. His software “Touchlines” (ibid., p. 31), for instance, enables both audience and performers to touch computer-simulated lines which are mapped in the physical performance space. Since the touches trigger “changes in sound, music, lighting, or projections” (ibid.), the audience members effectively also become performers and co-creators.
