As regards BIPED, the “virtual” characteristics of the motion capture derived computer simulation - in the form of graphic representations of figures moving in a three dimensional mathematical model of space - are here seen as a perceptual abstraction rather than as an instance of the virtual.
Two alternative applications of the virtual that I will discuss at some length are the virtualities of Susanne Langer (1953) and Dee Reynolds (2007). Both Langer and Reynolds address the concept of the virtual directly in relation to dance practices, and both are rooted in the phenomenological tradition: in the case of Langer, Ernst Cassirer (1953), and in the case of Reynolds, Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1962; 1968). Langer’s and Reynolds’s development of the virtual are also strongly related to the vitalist tradition, which argues that the origin of dance is to be found in a primeval urge to move, as a basic impulse towards an externalisation of an inner emotional state (Martin, 1946; Sachs, 1937).
However, in the general sense of the word, neither Langer, nor Reynolds can be strictly classified as vitalists. To the contrary, Langer criticises the idea that the essence of dance should be found in “the naturalistic doctrine that dance is a free discharge either of surplus energy or of emotional excitement” (1953, p. 177). Instead, Langer aligns herself with Cassirer’s argument that art has to be understood as symbolic form, and her definition of the virtual corresponds to the very essence of each particular art form as a unique primary illusion in the mind of the perceiver. Reynolds (2007), on the other hand, does not aim to define any essence or origin of dance. While she does refer to the vitalist dance critic John Martin’s (1933b) influential theory on kinaesthesia and metakinesis, her focus is rather on how kinaesthetic imagination provided a creative force in the development of modern dance, particularly as it was practised by Mary Wigman, Martha Graham, and Merce Cunningham. The virtual, in Reynolds’s account, corresponds to a phenomenologically understood intentionality, which is largely derived from her reading of Merleau-Ponty (1962).
The notion of the abstract plays a most crucial part in my discussion. Not only, as already implied, does it signify the common understanding of “virtuality” as a computer simulation, but it has a much wider and more fundamental role in the development of the thesis.
